KEP-5598: Opportunistic batching (#5599)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/5598-scheduling-cache/README.md

Reviewer: > * Even if two pods are the same for the scheduling perspective, that's just a one side. The scheduling has the other important side, which is the cluster state. Filtering results/scoring results can be easily changed by the cluster state changes.

True, but the idea behind it is that such an approach reflects our desire to schedule many pods in one scheduling cycle. If we treat pod-by-pod scheduling part more like verification and binding, the changes that happened after such scheduling are natural ones.

The verification may indeed fail because of the conflicting changes in the meantime, which is fine, as WaitOnPermit is the phase on which we accept changes to many pods atomically (scoped to the kube-scheduler of course).

Note also that once this mechanism become workload-aware (starts depending on Workload API gate) the outcome of the one-cycle multi-pod scheduling would be preliminary resource reservation (most likely setting NNN), so the changes that happen in the meantime (before the workload/gang is accepted on WaitOnPermit) should at least avoid breaking the constructed placement.

> * Wouldn't it result in putting a lot of pods into the same node? We have some existing mechanism to avoid picking up the same node continuously when several nodes have the same score.

This is why the initial implementation focus on the specific 1-pod-per-node use case. Without it we'd have to at least repeat scoring after each pod. That would greatly degrade the benefits and it wouldn't be the way we are going to do it long term either, since per pod scoring does not always lead to the best possible workload placements.

Author: Excellent questions and agreeing with dom4ha's responses.

1) We update the cache as hosts are used, so incoming pods will keep the cache "fresh". We are not paying attention to pod death, so we run the risk of missing newly freed nodes, but that should be the primary risk, unless I am missing something.

We do have a blind spot if there are multiple schedulers; I think this is addressable but we believe it is reasonable for v1 (based on conversations with Heba).

2) We are focused on 1-pod-per-node, so we will remove a host as soon as it is used; we literally can't use it more than once.

with a complement of daemon set pods. This simplifies our scheduling needs significantly.

### Goals

 * Improve the performance of scheduling large jobs on large clusters where the constraints are simple.
 * Begin building infrastructure to support gang scheduling and other "multi-pod" scheduling requests.
 * Ensure that the infrastructure we build is maintainable as we update, add and remove plugins.
 * Never impact feasibility.
 * Provide identical results to our current scheduler for 1-pod-per-node environments.
 * Provide an experience with limited changes in multi-pod-per-node environments.

### Non-Goals

 * We are not attempting to apply this optimization to all pods. Some constraints
do not lend themselves to caching. Instead, we focus on customers who have
large jobs, who need high performance, and do not generally use these
more complex constraints. While we expect the cache to always be on, many pods will not be 
able to take advantage of it.
 * We are not adding gang scheduling of any kind in this KEP. This is purely a performance
improvement, although we hope the work on this KEP will help us with gang scheduling as we build it.

> ## Proposal

Author: Excellent thought. I'll look up ecache and see what I can find.

> ## Proposal

Author: Added a section on the eCache. PTAL.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: Thanks - that helps a lot!

> ## Proposal

Author: Of course! Thanks for the suggestion. It was very useful to read through; always good to make sure we don't make the same mistake twice!

See https://github.com/bwsalmon/kubernetes/pull/1 for a draft version of the code. Feedback is extremely welcome.

We introduce two things:
 * The pod cache.
 * A pod scheduling signature

### Pod cache

The end result of the scheduler cycles is a list of node names that will fit
the current pod, ordered by their score from most to least attractive. This result
is what we cache; the current pod will use the first node on the list, and we cache the remaining
results, indexed by the pod's "scheduling signature" (which we will describe later).

When a pod with the same signature comes later, we find the entry in our cache and pull the first
node off the list. We then go down the nominated node path. Just as we would with a pod
with a NominatedNodeName in it, we only re-evaluate the feasibility of this node before using it.

> Since we assume 1-pod-per-node, we know that the node used by the current pod 

Author: So the current thought is this (I'll make this more explicit here).

The user has to opt-in with the scheduling profile, we should mention this clearly there. 

If they get it wrong it will not necessarily lead to incorrect behavior, just a shift of the scoring somewhat. So I think the cost is comparatively low.

I'm open to more tracking if we think that is appropriate. We can tell if a pod class is 1-pod-per-node, so we can flag that case if we'd like, and we should also be able to tell if multiple non-daemon set pods land on the same nodes after the fact.

Thoughts on how much you think is necessary?

> Since we assume 1-pod-per-node, we know that the node used by the current pod 

Author: By "scheduling profile" we do mean the scheduler config. So the user would need to create a scheduler config with a flag set and then reference it in the pod definitions. Thoughts on better ways to handle it?

two pods are the "same" we introduce a signature API to plugins.

## Motivation

Today our scheduling algorithm is O(num pods x num nodes) where num pods is the number of pods to schedule
and num nodes the number of nodes in the cluster. As the size of clusters and jobs continue
to increase, this leads to low performance when scheduling or rescheduling 
large jobs. This increases customer cost and slows down customer jobs, both
unpleasant impacts. Optimizations like this one have the potential to dramaticly
reduce the cost of scheduling in these scenarios.

We are also working on multi-pod scheduling, which will give us a way to consider multiple 
pods at the same time. While full multi-pod scheduling will likely deprecate the cache, 
the signatures work and structuring of the cache dependencies should be portable to the new cycles
that consider multiple pods.

Another change is the shift towards 1-pod-per-node in batch and ML environments. Many
of these environments (among others) only attempt to run a single customer pod on each node, along
with a complement of daemon set pods. This simplifies our scheduling needs significantly.

### Goals

>  * Improve the performance of scheduling large jobs on large clusters where the constraints are simple.

Reviewer 3: Where's the bottleneck for the scheduling you are imagining in this cluster? If pods are that simple, most of plugins should just return `Skip` at PreXXXX phase.

Author: The bottleneck is just iterating through all the nodes and checking; once you have 100000 nodes just iterating through them and checking labels becomes pretty expensive. None of the checks individually should be expensive, there are just a lot of them. I did some benchmarking with the scheduler_perf tests, I can grab results from some there if you'd like to look through them together...

>  * Begin building infrastructure to support gang scheduling and other "multi-pod" scheduling requests.

Reviewer 3: I think it's also mentioned in our sig-scheduling meeting. But, how would it fit our future picture of gang scheduling? I imagine a separate phase would decide all placements for the gang pods at once before proceeding to the existing filter/score/etc phases. 
Are we sure that this cache mechanism would still remain useful? 
Even further, is it really something we should focus/invest our time now?

Reviewer 3: > So I think we expect the cache itself will be deprecated by gang scheduling; we won't need to cache between cycles because we will just handle the pods in the same cycle. This is why we have kept the cache relatively simple and focused on a particular use case.

Right, and that's the core reason I'm doubting why we need to do this today, given we know the gang scheduling is coming. 
Note that this cache mechanism is definitely not going to be that simple, implementation wise. 

> But the signature and reuse mechanisms should remain useful.

For who? This feature's target is already very small even at this point (because of many limitations), and after the gang scheduling, how large portion of pods in this world can get the benefit? and is that worthy enough for us to keep maintaining the feature? 
I'm already not a fan of the idea to introduce a optimization specifically for 1-pod-per-node scheduling even with many other limitation. 

> The reason to invest in this now is to both build the signature framework and start to get familiar with the advantages and challenges of evaluating a group of pods against a set of nodes once, with at least some production exposure.
..
Another way to see it is this: the cache is a "Trojan Horse" for injecting multi-pod scheduling into the system

Hmm, I don't understand. For me, this feature and a future gang scheduling just look like two different things, and we're taking a unnecessary risk/effort here to try something not that similar, which we know will be less useful after the gang scheduling arrives.

 * Ensure that the infrastructure we build is maintainable as we update, add and remove plugins.
 * Never impact feasibility.
 * Provide identical results to our current scheduler for 1-pod-per-node environments.
 * Provide an experience with limited changes in multi-pod-per-node environments.

### Non-Goals

 * We are not attempting to apply this optimization to all pods. Some constraints
do not lend themselves to caching. Instead, we focus on customers who have
large jobs, who need high performance, and do not generally use these
more complex constraints. While we expect the cache to always be on, many pods will not be 
able to take advantage of it.
 * We are not adding gang scheduling of any kind in this KEP. This is purely a performance

> improvement, although we hope the work on this KEP will help us with gang scheduling as we build it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
improvement without adding dependency on the Workload API
[KEP-4671](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5558), although we hope the work on this KEP will help us with gang scheduling as we build it.
```

## Proposal

See https://github.com/bwsalmon/kubernetes/pull/1 for a draft version of the code. Feedback is extremely welcome.

We introduce two things:
 * The pod cache.
 * A pod scheduling signature

### Pod cache

The end result of the scheduler cycles is a list of node names that will fit
the current pod, ordered by their score from most to least attractive. This result
is what we cache; the current pod will use the first node on the list, and we cache the remaining
results, indexed by the pod's "scheduling signature" (which we will describe later).

When a pod with the same signature comes later, we find the entry in our cache and pull the first

> node off the list. We then go down the nominated node path. Just as we would with a pod

Reviewer 3: So, there's multiple lists, one per one signature. When a scheduling happens and node#1 is selected, are we going to iterate all lists and remove node#1 from all lists? (assuming node#1 is no longer available for pods because of 1-pod-per-node assumption)

with a NominatedNodeName in it, we only re-evaluate the feasibility of this node before using it.

> Since we assume 1-pod-per-node, we know that the node used by the current pod 

Reviewer 3: Do you assume **all** pods in the cluster have 1-pod-per-node scheduling constraint? Or, could it be mixed like some are 1-pod-per-node scheduling, while others are normal scheduling, which multiple pods can land on the same node?

Author: No, we just assume that pods that hit the cache are 1-pod-per-node. So if some other (non-1-pod-per-node) workload uses a node it just gets removed from the cache and ignored by the 1-pod-per-node workloads in the cache.

So the other workloads obviously don't get any advantage from the cache, but they also won't be hurt by it...

Author: Added this to the text.

Author: Closing comment, but feel free to reopen if I missed something...

cannot be used by subsequent pods (of any signature).
Thus we remove the host from all signatures in the cache. The cache is built
in a way that makes it easy to remove entries by either pod signature or host
so we can efficiently invalide entries. If we are not in a 1-pod-per-node
we could get "sub-optimal" results if the node just used is the best node for

> some other pod, but this should be the only issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any of the following pods, but this should be the only issue.
```

All stored results are timestamped, and we remove entries when they are more
than a few seconds old to ensure we do not get stale data. Since we are targeting
large numbers of pods of the same type, this should be sufficient to get the benefit
we are looking for.

### Pod scheduling signature

The pod scheduling signature is used to determine if two pods are "the same"
from a scheduling perspective. In specific, what this means is that any pod

> with the given signature will get the same scores / feasibility results from

Reviewer: @sanposhiho @macsko This is an important element of the proposal that we should review carefully. The assumption here is that assigning a pod does not change the feasibility nor scoring results for "the same" following pods.

By caching the results of the first pod, we are in fact capturing the cluster state and ignore any cluster changes that happens in the meantime (there is no guaranteed ordering of the following vs other pods). It should be equivalent to scheduling those pods in a single scheduling cycle.

Note that each pod cached assignment will be reassessed in the scheduling cycle, so the only potential consequence is that new feasible nodes that appeared in the meantime may be missed or scores may be different. The aggressive cache invalidation timeout is supposed to mitigate it.

any arbitrary set of nodes. This is necessary for the cache to work, since we
need to be able to reuse the previous work.

Note that some pods will not have a signature, because the scoring uses not
just pod and node attributes, but other pods in the system, global data
about pod placement, etc. These nodes get a nil signature, and we fallback
to the slow path.

> We exclude pods with the following constraints:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We exclude pods with the following constraints (the only known incompatible constraints in the in-tree plugins):
```

   * Pod affinity rules (affinity or anti-affinity)
   * Topology spread rules (including inherited rules from the system default) This constraint we should attempt to lift in the future.

To construct a signature, we add a new function for each plugin to implement.

> This function takes a pod and generates a signature for that plugin as a string. 

Reviewer 3: Can you add the explaination how the interface will look like on the kep

Author: Yes, good call. I'll pull in the signatures from the draft version.

Author: Ok, added the draft implementation here in the text, PTAL...

 We will also provide tests that evaluate different pod configurations against different node configurations and ensure that
 any time the signatures match the results do as well. This will help us catch issues in the future, in addition to providing
 testing opportunities in other areas.

 If plugin changes prove to be an issue, we could codify the signature as a new "Scheduling" object that only has a subset
 of the fields of the pod. Plugins that "opt-in" could only be given access to this reduced scheduling object, and we could then use the entire scheduling object as the signature. This would make it more or less impossible for the signature and plugins to be out of sync, and would
 naturally surface new dependencies as additions to the scheduling object. However, as we expect plugin changes to be relatively 
 modest, we don't believe the complexity of making the interface changes is worth the risk today.

See https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/65714#issuecomment-410016382 as starting point on eCache.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: Would the cache size keep growing, depending on the num of nodes + how various pods the cluster has? If yes, that's a concern definitely. How would we address that? 
The cluster admin doesn't have a control of how various pods the cluster would get.

Also, how can the cluster admin estimate an expected memory growth before starting to use this feature / before the scheduler encounters OOM? Are they going to just keep eyes on the num of calculated signatures somehow? What if some users suddenly submits many new types of workloads?

Author: Ah, I didn't add that to the text description but have it in the draft code. The cache has a maximum number of signatures. If it gets too large we evict the oldest entries. We can compute a maximum size assuming full signature lines and the max number of entries. We can obviously get fancier and look at the number of cache entries or total byes as well, but I would expect this should be sufficient keep it limited.

Author: Added comment to the text about the max size restriction. Close comment but please reopen if necessary...

#### Plugins need to keep signatures up to date

The cache will only work if plugin maintainers are able to keep their portion of the signature up-to-date. We beleive this should
be doable because the logic is put into the plugin interface itself, and we are restricting it to portions of the pod spec,
but there is still risk of subtle dependencies creeping in.

If plugin changes prove to be an issue, we could codify the signature as a new "Scheduling" object that only has a subset
of the fields of the pod. Plugins that "opt-in" could only be given access to this reduced scheduling object, and we could then use the entire scheduling object as the signature. This would make it more or less impossible for the signature and plugins to be out of sync, and would
naturally surface new dependencies as additions to the scheduling object. However, as we expect plugin changes to be relatively 

> modest, we don't believe the complexity of making the interface changes is worth the risk today.

Reviewer 4: Duplicate paragraph [R323-R326](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5599/files#diff-8e7620fbd863b88a8584ea4b684b119efd47da7653b3ec901b11c9ad43ebd3adR323-R326)

Author: Deduped.

#### We are narrowing the feature set where the cache will work

Because we are explicitly limiting the functionality that this cache will support, we run the risk of designing something
that will not work for enough customers for it to be useful.

To mitigate this risk we are actively engaging with customers and doing analysis of data available on K8s users to ensure we are still
capturing a large enough number of user use cases. We also will address this by expanding over time; we expect to have a few interested
parties up front, but will then evaluate expansions that could onboard more.

## Design Details

> ### Pod signature v1

Reviewer 3: To discuss risks, please list up all the cluster events that would be ignored by this cache mechanism. I mean, for example, if a node's label is changed while a cache is alive, scores from nodeaffinity could be changed, but we'll ignore them while the cache is alive. If a node taint is removed/added, filter results from tainttoleration could be changed, but we'll ignore them. etc

The follow section outlines the attributes we are currently proposing to use as the signature for each of the 
plugins in the scheduler. We need the plugin owners to validate that these signatures are correct, or help
us find the correct signature.

Note that the signature does not need to be stable across versions, or even invocations of the scheduler. 
It only needs to be comparable between pods on a given running scheduler instance.

>  * DynamicResources: For now we mark a pod unsignable if it has dynamic resource claims. We should improve this in the future, since most

Reviewer 4: Why does this plugin will makr pods as unsignable?

Author: Will add to the text, that is a excellent question.

DRA claims can reference multiple nodes / pods in addition to the ones we are immediately considering.

My understanding from John Bellemaric is that we can tell if that is the case with a little work, and we expect most claims to be node specific, but we'd need to do that work for them to be handleable.

Open to requiring this in the first version if we think it is immediately critical...

 resource claims will allow for a signature.
 * ImageLocality: We use the canonicalized image names from the Volumes as the signature.
 * InterPodAffinity: If either the PodAffinity or PodAntiAffinity fields are set, the pod is marked unsignable, otherwise an empty signature.

>  * NodeAffinity: We use the NodeAffinity and NodeSelector fields as the signature.

Reviewer: NodeAffinity might be set also in scheduler profile (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity-per-scheduling-profile), so either the profile should be captured in the signature or NodeAffinity from the scheduler configuration.

Author: Thanks, that's a good catch.

I'll make sure we capture both...

Author: Added to the text.

 * NodeName: We use the NodeName field as the signature.
 * NodePorts: We use the results from util.GetHostPorts(pod) as the signature.
 * NodeResourcesBalancedAllocation: We use the output of calculatePodResourceRequestList as the signature.
 * NodeResourcesFit: We use the output of the computePodResourceRequest function as the signature.
 * NodeUnschedulable: We use the Tolerations field as the signature.
 * NodeVolumeLimits: We use all Volume information except from Volumes of type ConfigMap or Secret.

>  * PodTopologySpread: If the PodTopologySpead field is set, or it is not set but a default set of rules are applied, we mark the pod unsignable, otherwise it returns an empty signature.

Reviewer 3: > a default set of rules are applied, we mark the pod unsignable

Meaning, all pods that belong to Service, ReplicaSet, StatefulSet or ReplicationController are not eligible to use the cache. That's a large portion.

>  * PodTopologySpread: If the PodTopologySpead field is set, or it is not set but a default set of rules are applied, we mark the pod unsignable, otherwise it returns an empty signature.

Author: Also added this to the text; feel free to reopen if I missed something...

 * TaintToleration: We use the Tolerations field as the signature.
 * VolumeBinding: Same as NodeVolumeLimits.
 * VolumeRestrictions: Same as NodeVolumeLimits.
 * VolumeZone: Same as NodeVolumeLimits.

> 

Reviewer 4: Do we need to take the defaultPreemption into our consideration?

Author: Ok, I took a look through the code and came to what is a somewhat counter-intuitive answer to me.

It doesn't look like we need to include DefaultPreemption, and thus priority in the signature, because we don't need to include PostFilter plugins. I did make that decision early on, but I'm re-digesting it now.

This is because we are caching the result after prefilter, filter, prescore and score, but before the postfilter step. PostFilter only runs if we can't find anything after the previous steps, then we use the priority to decide if we should try to preempt something.

So regardless of the priority, we would (correctly) get the same results from the cache. But if they were empty, we would potentially evict in one case and not in the other.

If you get a chance, please take a look and make sure this matches your understanding...

-->

[ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

> - `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

Author: Done. Especially since this is my first KEP, PTAL and let me know if I'm capturing the appropriate information...

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

> - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Author: Done.
